

 
                                                                    
 
 
 
 
This document consists of 8 printed pages. 
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 
 
[Turn over 
 
Cambridge O Level 
 
BIOLOGY 5090/41 
Paper 4 Alternative to Practical October/November 2024 
MARK SCHEME 
Maximum Mark: 40 
 
 
Published 
 
 
This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the 
examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the 
details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have 
considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 
 
Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for 
Teachers. 
 
Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 
 
Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2024 series for most 
Cambridge IGCSE, Cambridge International A and AS Level components, and some Cambridge O Level 
components. 
 
 
 

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2024  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 2 of 8  
 
Generic Marking Principles 
 
These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the 
specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptions for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these 
marking principles. 
 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1: 
 
Marks must be awarded in line with: 
 
• the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 
• the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 
• the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2: 
 
Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions). 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3: 
 
Marks must be awarded positively: 
 
• marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyond 
the scope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 
• marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 
• marks are not deducted for errors 
• marks are not deducted for omissions 
• answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by the 
question as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous. 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4: 
 
Rules must be applied consistently, e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level 
descriptors. 

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2024  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 3 of 8  
 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5: 
 
Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may 
be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen). 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6: 
 
Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or 
grade descriptors in mind. 
 
 
Science-Specific Marking Principles 
 
1 Examiners should consider the context and scientific use of any keywords when awarding marks. Although keywords may be present, marks 
should not be awarded if the keywords are used incorrectly.  
2 The examiner should not choose between contradictory statements given in the same question part, and credit should not be awarded for 
any correct statement that is contradicted within the same question part. Wrong science that is irrelevant to the question should be ignored. 
3 Although spellings do not have to be correct, spellings of syllabus terms must allow for clear and unambiguous separation from other 
syllabus terms with which they may be confused (e.g. ethane / ethene, glucagon / glycogen, refraction / reflection). 
4 The error carried forward (ecf) principle should be applied, where appropriate. If an incorrect answer is subsequently used in a scientifically 
correct way, the candidate should be awarded these subsequent marking points. Further guidance will be included in the mark scheme 
where necessary and any exceptions to this general principle will be noted. 
5 ‘List rule’ guidance 
 
For questions that require n responses (e.g. State two reasons ...): 
 
• The response should be read as continuous prose, even when numbered answer spaces are provided. 
• Any response marked ignore in the mark scheme should not count towards n. 
• Incorrect responses should not be awarded credit but will still count towards n. 
• Read the entire response to check for any responses that contradict those that would otherwise be credited. Credit should not be 
awarded for any responses that are contradicted within the rest of the response. Where two responses contradict one another, this 
should be treated as a single incorrect response. 
• Non-contradictory responses after the first n responses may be ignored even if they include incorrect science. 

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2024  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 4 of 8  
 
6 Calculation specific guidance 
 
Correct answers to calculations should be given full credit even if there is no working or incorrect working, unless the question states ‘show 
your working’.  
 
For questions in which the number of significant figures required is not stated, credit should be awarded for correct answers when rounded 
by the examiner to the number of significant figures given in the mark scheme. This may not apply to measured values.  
 
For answers given in standard form (e.g. a  10
n
) in which the convention of restricting the value of the coefficient (a) to a value between 1 
and 10 is not followed, credit may still be awarded if the answer can be converted to the answer given in the mark scheme.  
 
Unless a separate mark is given for a unit, a missing or incorrect unit will normally mean that the final calculation mark is not awarded. 
Exceptions to this general principle will be noted in the mark scheme. 
7 Guidance for chemical equations 
 
Multiples / fractions of coefficients used in chemical equations are acceptable unless stated otherwise in the mark scheme.  
 
State symbols given in an equation should be ignored unless asked for in the question or stated otherwise in the mark scheme. 
 
 
Mark schemes will use these abbreviations: 
 
; separates marking points 
/ alternatives 
() contents of brackets are not required but should be implied 
R reject 
A accept (for answers correctly cued by the question, or guidance for examiners) 
Ig ignore (for incorrect but irrelevant responses) 
AW alternative wording (where responses vary more than usual) 
AVP alternative valid point (where a greater than usual variety of responses is expected) 
ORA or reverse argument 
underline actual word underlined must be used by candidate 
+ statements on both sides of the + are needed for that mark  

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2024  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 5 of 8  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
1(a)(i) suitable different letters / numbers to write on each test-tube ; 1  
1(a)(ii) prevent transfer of sugar/sugar substitute to other test-tubes ; 1  
1(b)(i) 
headings: time / minutes + distance (of yeast mixture above start 
level) / mm ; 
 
measurements at 5 minutes: 22 + 0 + 0; 
 
temperature at 5 minutes: 33; 
 
correct values for 10 and 15 minutes ; 
 
all data recorded in the table without units ; 
 
Time  
/ mins 
Distance (of yeast 
mixture above start 
level) / mm 
Temperature 
of water 
bath / 
o
C 
Sugar Sugar 
substitut
e 
No 
addition 
5 21–23 0 0 33 
10 38 0 0 31 
15 50 0 0 39 
 
5  
 
 
A 21-23 for measurement at 5 minutes 
 
 
1(b)(ii) so that a comparison can be made ; 1 A to see the effect of sugar / sugar substitute 
1(b)(iii) yeast can only respire using sugar / yeast cannot use the sugar 
substitute to respire ; 
1  

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2024  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 6 of 8  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
1(b)(iv) 
poor / not well controlled / not good enough AW + temperature 
fluctuations / changes / was not constant AW ; 
1  
1(b)(v) (too much) hot water added; 1  
1(c)(i)  
diameter = 2.2 ; 
 
 
radius of mixture = 1.1 ; 
 
 
calculation: (3.14  1.1
2
)  3.8 ; 
 
answer + rounding to 1 d.p: 14.4 ; 
4 Answer on answer line takes precedence 
A 2.1–2.3 
 
 
A correct radius once anywhere in a calculation 
 
 
A πr
2
h written out with no numbers 
 
 
1(c)(ii) use (graduated) measuring cylinders (instead of test-tubes) ; 
 
subtract starting volume from volume at each time interval ; 
2  
 
    
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
2(a)(i) both axes fully labelled ; 
 
linear scales with values at origin of both ; 
 
five points correctly plotted + points marked with crosses or encircled 
dots ; 
 
single straight ruled line through all points ; 
4  
2(a)(ii) line extrapolated on graph ; 
 
90  1 ; 
2  

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2024  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 7 of 8  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
2(a)(iii) 18 ; 
 
mm / minute ; 
2  
2(b) any six from: 
 
1 at least 3 different temperatures below 70 
o
C identified ; 
 
2 use of water-bath ;  
 
3 give time for apparatus to come to temperature before 
measurements taken ;  
 
4 adjust drop of coloured liquid to beginning of scale before 
recording ;  
 
5 (at each temperature) record the distance moved on scale with 
time / after fixed time record the distance moved ; 
 
6 same seeds / mass / number of seeds / stage of germination ; 
 
7 repeat and calculate mean ; 
 
8 calculate rate for each temperature ; 
 
9 conclusion stated ; 
6  

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2024  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024 Page 8 of 8  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
3(a)(i) 
whole fruit drawn + sharp pencil line + clear and continuous lines + no 
shading ; 
 
80 mm minimum length of stalk and seed ; 
 
proportions – stalk drawn with a double line to top and longer than 
seed ; 
 
detail – seed delimited and tapered + hooks drawn with double lines +  
hooks only on top half of seed ; 
4  
3(a)(ii) 
straight line drawn between C and D + 35–37 + mm; 
 
candidate answer in mm ÷ magnification (36 / 3); 
 
correct length + whole number only (12) ; 
3  
 
3(b) 
low mass / light / small + easily carried / picked up by wind; 
 
hairs + increase surface area / act like a parachute / helps it to glide; 
2  
 