

 
                                                                    
 
 
 
 
This document consists of 9 printed pages. 
 
© UCLES 2023 
 
[Turn over 
 
Cambridge O Level 
 
BIOLOGY 5090/31 
Paper 3 Practical Test October/November 2023 
MARK SCHEME 
Maximum Mark: 40 
 
 
Published 
 
 
This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the 
examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the 
details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have 
considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 
 
Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for 
Teachers. 
 
Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 
 
Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the October/November 2023 series for most 
Cambridge IGCSE, Cambridge International A and AS Level components, and some Cambridge O Level 
components. 
 
 
 

5090/31 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2023  
 
© UCLES 2023 Page 2 of 9  
 
Generic Marking Principles 
 
These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the 
specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptors for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these 
marking principles. 
 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1: 
 
Marks must be awarded in line with: 
 
• the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 
• the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 
• the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2: 
 
Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions). 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3: 
 
Marks must be awarded positively: 
 
• marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyond 
the scope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 
• marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 
• marks are not deducted for errors 
• marks are not deducted for omissions 
• answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by the 
question as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous. 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4: 
 
Rules must be applied consistently, e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level 
descriptors. 

5090/31 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2023  
 
© UCLES 2023 Page 3 of 9  
 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5: 
 
Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may 
be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen). 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6: 
 
Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or 
grade descriptors in mind. 
 
 
Science-Specific Marking Principles 
 
1 Examiners should consider the context and scientific use of any keywords when awarding marks. Although keywords may be present, marks 
should not be awarded if the keywords are used incorrectly.  
2 The examiner should not choose between contradictory statements given in the same question part, and credit should not be awarded for 
any correct statement that is contradicted within the same question part. Wrong science that is irrelevant to the question should be ignored. 
3 Although spellings do not have to be correct, spellings of syllabus terms must allow for clear and unambiguous separation from other 
syllabus terms with which they may be confused (e.g. ethane / ethene, glucagon / glycogen, refraction / reflection). 
4 The error carried forward (ecf) principle should be applied, where appropriate. If an incorrect answer is subsequently used in a scientifically 
correct way, the candidate should be awarded these subsequent marking points. Further guidance will be included in the mark scheme 
where necessary and any exceptions to this general principle will be noted. 
5 ‘List rule’ guidance 
 
For questions that require n responses (e.g. State two reasons ...): 
 
• The response should be read as continuous prose, even when numbered answer spaces are provided. 
• Any response marked ignore in the mark scheme should not count towards n. 
• Incorrect responses should not be awarded credit but will still count towards n. 
• Read the entire response to check for any responses that contradict those that would otherwise be credited. Credit should not be 
awarded for any responses that are contradicted within the rest of the response. Where two responses contradict one another, this 
should be treated as a single incorrect response. 
• Non-contradictory responses after the first n responses may be ignored even if they include incorrect science. 

5090/31 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2023  
 
© UCLES 2023 Page 4 of 9  
 
6 Calculation specific guidance 
 
Correct answers to calculations should be given full credit even if there is no working or incorrect working, unless the question states ‘show 
your working’.  
 
For questions in which the number of significant figures required is not stated, credit should be awarded for correct answers when rounded 
by the examiner to the number of significant figures given in the mark scheme. This may not apply to measured values.  
 
For answers given in standard form (e.g. a  10
n
) in which the convention of restricting the value of the coefficient (a) to a value between 1 
and 10 is not followed, credit may still be awarded if the answer can be converted to the answer given in the mark scheme.  
 
Unless a separate mark is given for a unit, a missing or incorrect unit will normally mean that the final calculation mark is not awarded. 
Exceptions to this general principle will be noted in the mark scheme. 
7 Guidance for chemical equations 
 
Multiples / fractions of coefficients used in chemical equations are acceptable unless stated otherwise in the mark scheme.  
 
State symbols given in an equation should be ignored unless asked for in the question or stated otherwise in the mark scheme. 
 
 
  

5090/31 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2023  
 
© UCLES 2023 Page 5 of 9  
 
Mark schemes will use these abbreviations: 
 
; separates marking points 
 / alternatives 
() contents of brackets are not required but should be implied 
R reject 
A accept (for answers correctly cued by the question, or guidance for examiners) 
Ig ignore (for incorrect but irrelevant responses) 
AW alternative wording (where responses vary more than usual) 
AVP alternative valid point (where a greater than usual variety of responses is expected) 
ORA or reverse argument 
underline actual word underlined must be used by candidate 
+ statements on both sides of the + are needed for that mark  

5090/31 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2023  
 
© UCLES 2023 Page 6 of 9  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
1(a)(i) all data entered ; 
 
height increase in C > A at 6 minutes ; 
 
height greater at 6 minutes compared to 2 minutes for each 
test tube ; ; ; 
5  
1(a)(ii) time / minutes ; 1  
1(a)(iii) description: more bubbles produced ; 
 
explanation: more catalase / enzyme / potato in contact with 
hydrogen peroxide / substrate ; 
more oxygen produced / hydrogen peroxide broken down ; 
3  
1(a)(iv) 
description explanation 
surface of layer of bubbles 
not flat ; 
difficult to accurately 
measure height ; 
some bubbles might not 
be trapped / burst ; 
not add to height ; 
parts of potato may stick 
together ; 
so surface area / catalase 
not increased ; 
some bubbles may stick 
to potato parts ; 
so do not increase height ; 
difficult to cut pieces of 
potato accurately; 
results not comparable as 
surface area affected ; 
 
4 Max 2 marks for descriptions. Explanations must match 
description for marks. 
 
 
1(b)(i) (graduated) measuring cylinder ; 1  

5090/31 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2023  
 
© UCLES 2023 Page 7 of 9  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
1(b)(ii) 1 (contents of conical flask) at different temperatures ; 
 
2 at least 3 temperatures identified ; 
 
3 use of water-bath ; 
 
4 give time for hydrogen peroxide to come to temperature 
before potato added ; 
 
5 same volume / mass / number of cubes of potato / same 
potato / species / type ; 
 
6 same volume / concentration of hydrogen peroxide ; 
 
7 measuring cylinder full of water each time ; 
 
8 measure volume gas produced in stated total time / time 
to collect fixed volume of gas ; 
 
9 compare volume of oxygen produced at different 
temperatures ; 
6  
    
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
2(a)(i) 21 + entered in correct table cell ; 1 A 20–22 mm 
2(a)(ii) 20.7 ; 
mm on answer line + value entered in correct table cell ; 
2  

5090/31 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2023  
 
© UCLES 2023 Page 8 of 9  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
2(b)(i) axes fully labelled + bars labelled ; 
 
linear scale for diameter + value at origin + at least half of 
grid used in both directions ; 
 
mean values plotted correctly ; 
 
all bars ruled and of equal width + bars not touching ; 
4  
2(b)(ii) H ; 1  
2(c) petri dish 2 + antibiotic F / 6 mm measurement ; 
exclude it from the mean / repeat experiment ; 
2  
    
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
3(a)(i) line drawn + correct measurement 27–29 mm + units ;  
 
candidate answer  0.06 (mm) ; 
 
correct magnification + whole number only ; 
3  
3(a)(ii) sharp pencil + continuous outer lines + no shading ; 
 
only collecting duct and loop of Henle drawn touching + 
delimited + correct orientation ; 
 
shape of both oval / taller than wide + loop of Henle smaller 
than collecting duct + size of drawing ; 
 
2 nuclei in loop of Henle + 11 / 12 nuclei in collecting duct ; 
 
minimum 2 cells delimited in collecting duct ; 
5  

5090/31 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
October/November 2023  
 
© UCLES 2023 Page 9 of 9  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
3(b) Benedict’s solution + heat (added to urine) ; 
 
change colour to green / yellow / orange / red if glucose 
present; 
2  
 