

 
                                                                    
 
 
 
 
This document consists of 11 printed pages. 
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 
 
[Turn over 
 
Cambridge O Level 
 
BIOLOGY 5090/41 
Paper 4 Alternative to Practical May/June 2025 
MARK SCHEME 
Maximum Mark: 40 
 
 
Published 
 
 
This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of  the 
examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the 
details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which would have 
considered the acceptability of  alternative answers. 
 
Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report f or 
Teachers. 
 
Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 
 
Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes f or the May/June 2025 series f or most 
Cambridge IGCSE, Cambridge International A and AS Level components, and some Cambridge O Level 
components. 
 
 
 

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 2 of 11  
 
Generic Marking Principles 
 
These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. They should be applied alongside the 
specific content of the mark scheme or generic level descriptions for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these 
marking principles. 
 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1: 
 
Marks must be awarded in line with: 
 
• the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 
• the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 
• the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2: 
 
Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions). 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3: 
 
Marks must be awarded positively: 
 
• marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit is given for valid answers which go beyond 
the scope of the syllabus and mark scheme, referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 
• marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 
• marks are not deducted for errors 
• marks are not deducted for omissions 
• answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these features are specifically assessed by the 
question as indicated by the mark scheme. The meaning, however, should be unambiguous. 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4: 
 
Rules must be applied consistently, e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed instructions or in the application of generic level 
descriptors. 

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 3 of 11  
 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5: 
 
Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question (however; the use of the full mark range may 
be limited according to the quality of the candidate responses seen). 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6: 
 
Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should not be awarded with grade thresholds or 
grade descriptors in mind. 
 
 
Science-Specific Marking Principles 
 
1 Examiners should consider the context and scientific use of any keywords when awarding marks. Although keywords may be present, marks 
should not be awarded if the keywords are used incorrectly.  
2 The examiner should not choose between contradictory statements given in the same question part, and credit should not be awarded for 
any correct statement that is contradicted within the same question part. Wrong science that is irrelevant to the question should be ignored. 
3 Although spellings do not have to be correct, spellings of syllabus terms must allow for clear and unambiguous separation from other 
syllabus terms with which they may be confused (e.g. ethane / ethene, glucagon / glycogen, refraction / reflection). 
4 The error carried forward (ecf) principle should be applied, where appropriate. If an incorrect answer is subsequently used in a scientifically 
correct way, the candidate should be awarded these subsequent marking points. Further guidance will be included in the mark scheme 
where necessary and any exceptions to this general principle will be noted. 
5 ‘List rule’ guidance 
 
For questions that require n responses (e.g. State two reasons ...): 
 
• The response should be read as continuous prose, even when numbered answer spaces are provided. 
• Any response marked ignore in the mark scheme should not count towards n. 
• Incorrect responses should not be awarded credit but will still count towards n. 
• Read the entire response to check for any responses that contradict those that would otherwise be credited. Credit should not be 
awarded for any responses that are contradicted within the rest of the response. Where two responses contradict one another, this 
should be treated as a single incorrect response. 
• Non-contradictory responses after the first n responses may be ignored even if they include incorrect science. 

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 4 of 11  
 
6 Calculation specific guidance 
 
Correct answers to calculations should be given full credit even if there is no working or incorrect working, unless the question states ‘show 
your working’.  
 
For questions in which the number of significant figures required is not stated, credit should be awarded for correct answers when rounded 
by the examiner to the number of significant figures given in the mark scheme. This may not apply to measured values.  
 
For answers given in standard form (e.g. a  10
n
) in which the convention of restricting the value of the coefficient (a) to a value between 1 
and 10 is not followed, credit may still be awarded if the answer can be converted to the answer given in the mark scheme.  
 
Unless a separate mark is given for a unit, a missing or incorrect unit will normally mean that the final calculation mark is not awarded. 
Exceptions to this general principle will be noted in the mark scheme. 
7 Guidance for chemical equations 
 
Multiples / fractions of coefficients used in chemical equations are acceptable unless stated otherwise in the mark scheme.  
 
State symbols given in an equation should be ignored unless asked for in the question or stated otherwise in the mark scheme. 
 
 
  

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 5 of 11  
 
Annotations guidance for centres 
 
Examiners use a system of annotations as a shorthand for communicating their marking decisions to one another. Examiners are trained during the 
standardisation process on how and when to use annotations. The purpose of annotations is to inform the standardisation and monitoring 
processes and guide the supervising examiners when they are checking the work of examiners within their team. The meaning of annotations and 
how they are used is specific to each component and is understood by all examiners who mark the component.  
 
We publish annotations in our mark schemes to help centres understand the annotations they may see on copies of scripts. Note that there may 
not be a direct correlation between the number of annotations on a script and the mark awarded. Similarly, the use of an annotation may not be an 
indication of the quality of the response.  
 
The annotations listed below were available to examiners marking this component in this series.  
 
Annotation Meaning 
 
correct point or mark awarded 
 
incorrect point or mark not awarded 
 
information missing or insufficient for credit 
 
allow or accept 
 
insufficient point ignored while marking the rest of the response 
 
contradiction in response, mark not awarded 
 
 
benefit of the doubt given 
 
error carried forward applied 
 
benefit of doubt was considered, but the response was decided to not be sufficiently close for benefit of doubt to be applied 
 
point has been noted but no credit has been given 
or 
blank page seen 

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 6 of 11  
 
Annotation Meaning 
 
correct idea but not specific enough 
 
used to highlight parts of an extended response 
 
key point attempted / working towards marking point  
Ruler allows lengths to be measured 
Protractor allows angles to be measured 
Multi-line Overlay overlays graphs 
 
correct, awarding one mark from marking point 1. 
 
correct, awarding one mark from marking point 2, 
similar numbered ticks are used for marking point 3, 4, 5 etc. 
  

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 7 of 11  
 
 
Mark Scheme abbreviations 
 
;    separates marking points 
/   alternative responses for the same marking point 
R reject the response 
A accept the response 
I ignore the response 
ecf    error carried forward  
AVP   any valid point 
ora or reverse argument 
AW   alternative wording 
underline actual word given must be used by candidate (grammatical variants excepted) 
( ) the word / phrase in brackets is not required but sets the context  
max indicates the maximum number of marks that can be given  
mp marking point  
  

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 8 of 11  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
1(a)(i) single table with columns and rows drawn with ruled lines ; 
header for seed in column / row once only ; 
header height in mm in column / row once only ; 
header for A and B, once only ; 
 
seed length/mm 
 A B 
1 32–34 35 
2 35–37 40 
3 34–36 33 
4 38–40 36 
 
 Seed 
1 2 3 4 
Length / mm A     
B     
 
4  
1(a)(ii) all 4 measurements from A correct in mm ; 
all 4 measurements from A in correct place and in correct 
order ; 
(33, 36, 35 and 39 mm) 
2  
1(a)(iii) correct transfer of data ; 
1 35 
2 40   
3 33  
4 36 
1  

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 9 of 11  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
1(a)(iv) A 35.8 ; 
B 36.0 ; 
2  
1(a)(v) radicles in B curve down, in A they do not ; 
gravity acts on B / B shows positive gravitropism ; 
rotating drum cancels effect of gravity AW ; 
similar difference in the overall lengths ; 
 
max 3 
3  
 
1(b) identify anomalies / outliers / four peas is too small  
a sample ; 
to make the results more reliable ; 
2  
1(c) light does not affect the results / growth / light as a variable is 
controlled ; 
gravity is the only factor being investigated ; 
because roots normally grow in the dark / underground; 
 
max 2 
2  
 
1(d)(i) time / days on x-axis + both axes fully labelled ; 
linear scales + value(s) at origin + good use of grid ; 
5 plots correct ; 
points joined with ruled lines + no extrapolation ; 
4  
 
1(d)(ii) correct value from graph ; 
graph working shown ; 
correct units ; 
3  

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 10 of 11  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
2(a)(i) clear and clean lines drawn with a sharp pencil + no ruled 
lines + no shading ; 
minimum size 90 mm ; 
detail of stems (double line, one main stem, 3 branches) ; 
number of leaves (min 7) + bottom left lower branch two end 
leaves delimited ; 
correct position of tendrils (3) ; 
5  
2(a)(ii) dip in boiling water ;  
use of hot ethanol (to remove chlorophyll) ; 
use of water (to rinse / soften) ; 
iodine solution + blue-black ; 
 
max 3 
3  
    
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
3(a)(i) F + all tests negative AW ; 1  
3(a)(ii) E ; 
positive test for glucose and ketones AW ; 
2  

5090/41 Cambridge O Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 11 of 11  
 
Question Answer Marks Guidance 
3(b) 1 check pH at start of investigation for 20 people (assume 
pH 6.5) ; 
2 range of volumes of water drunk ; 
3 same time interval between drinking and           
measuring pH ; 
4 controlling other variables e.g. same 
diet / exercise / environmental temperature ; 
5 measure pH value of urine samples (after allotted time 
interval) ; 
6 colour change on UI paper compared to standard chart 
or use pH meter ; 
7 calculate mean pH for different volumes of water ; 
8 look for relationship  
(pH against volume of water drunk) ; 
 
max 6 
6  
 
 